Symptoms of Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease

Symptoms of hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) usually include fever, mouth sores, and skin rash. The rash is commonly found on the hands and feet.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease is common in infants and children younger than 5 years old. Most children have mild symptoms for 7 to 10 days.

Symptoms include

- Fever and flu-like symptoms
    Children often get a fever and other flu-like symptoms 3 to 5 days after they catch the virus. These can include:

    Fever
    Eating or drinking less
    Sore throat
    Feeling unwell

- Mouth sores
    Your child can get painful mouth sores. These sores usually start as small red spots, often on the tongue and insides of the mouth, that blister and can become painful.

    Signs that swallowing might be painful for your child:

    Not eating or drinking
    Drooling more than usual
    Only wanting to drink cold fluids


- Skin rash
    Your child can get a skin rash on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. It can also show up on the buttocks, legs, and arms.

    The rash usually is not itchy and looks like flat or slightly raised red spots, sometimes with blisters that have an area of redness at their base. Fluid in the blister can contain the virus that causes HFMD.

    Keep blisters clean and avoid touching them.




Prevent Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease

Wash your hands
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer.

- Always wash your hands:

    After changing diapers.
    After using the toilet.
    After blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing.
    Before and after caring for someone who is sick.
    Help children wash their hands. Teach them how to wash their hands and make sure they wash them often. Help them keep blisters clean and avoid touching them.
- Avoid close contact with people who are sick
    Avoid touching someone who has HFMD, such as hugging or kissing them.

    Can my child return to school if they are sick?

    Because HFMD is normally mild, children can continue to go to child care and schools as long as they:

        Have no fever.
        Have no uncontrolled drooling with mouth sores.
        Feel well enough to participate in classroom activities.
    Talk with your child’s healthcare provider if you are still not sure when it is okay for them to return. In some cases, the local health department may require children with HFMD to stay home to control an outbreak.

- Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth
    You can get infected with HFMD if you have the virus on your hands and then touch your eyes, nose, or mouth. To reduce your chance of getting sick, don’t touch your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
- Clean and disinfect
    Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and shared items, such as toys and doorknobs.



How to Treat Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease

Most people with hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) get better on their own in 7 to 10 days. There is no specific medical treatment for HFMD.

Treat symptoms and prevent dehydration
    You can take steps to relieve symptoms and prevent dehydration while you or your child are sick.

    Take over-the-counter medications to relieve fever and pain caused by mouth sores. These medications can include acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Never give aspirin to children.

    Drink enough liquids. Mouth sores can make it painful to swallow, so your child may not want to drink much. Make sure they drink enough to stay hydrated.

When to see a healthcare provider
    Your child is not able to drink normally and you’re worried they might be getting dehydrated.
    Your child’s fever lasts longer than 3 days.
    Your child has a weakened immune system (body’s ability to fight germs and sickness).
    Symptoms are severe.
    Your child is very young, especially younger than 6 months


How Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease Spreads

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) spreads easily through:

    Person-to-person contact.
    Droplets made when a person who is sick with HFMD sneezes, coughs, or talks.
    Contact with contaminated surfaces and objects.

Is hand, foot, and mouth disease contagious?
    Yes. HFMD is caused by viruses. A person infected with one of these viruses is contagious, which means that they can pass the virus to other people.

    If someone is sick with HFMD, the virus can be found in their:

        Nose and throat secretions, such as saliva, drool, or nasal mucus
        Fluid from blisters
        Feces (poop)
    People with HFMD are usually most contagious during the first week that they are sick. However, people can still sometimes spread the virus to others for days or weeks after symptoms go away, or even if they have no symptoms at all.

How do you get hand, foot, and mouth disease?
        Contact with droplets that contain the virus made when a person sick with HFMD coughs, sneezes, or talks.
        Touching an infected person or making other close contact with them, such as kissing, hugging, or sharing cups or eating utensils.
        Touching an infected person’s poop, such as changing diapers, and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth.
        Touching objects and surfaces that have the virus on them, like doorknobs or toys, and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth.
    Although rare, you can also get the viruses by swallowing recreational water, like in swimming pools. This can happen if the water is not properly treated with chlorine and becomes contaminated with the poop from a person who has HFMD.

Is hand, foot, and mouth disease is common?
Yes. HFMD is common and in the United States occurs mostly in the summer and fall, but you can get it any time of year.

What viruses cause hand, foot, and mouth disease?
    HFMD is caused by viruses that belong to the enterovirus family:
        Coxsackievirus A16 is typically the most common cause of HFMD in the United States. Other coxsackieviruses can also cause the illness.
        Coxsackievirus A6 can also cause HFMD and the symptoms may be more severe.
        Enterovirus 71 (EV-A71) has been associated with cases and outbreaks in East and Southeast Asia. Although rare, EV-A71 has been associated with more severe diseases such as encephalitis (swelling of the brain).

Can animals get hand, foot, and mouth disease?
    No. Animals such as cattle, pigs, sheep, and goats can get foot and mouth disease (or hoof-and-mouth disease), which is different from hand, foot, and mouth disease (or HFMD).
